---
layout: post
title: "On purposeful vagueness of words"
date: 2019-06-01 23:59 +0100
categories: [linguistics, knowledge, words]
tags: [etymology, morphology, definitions, vagueness, ambiguity]
img: street.jpg
---

In most formal discourses, the notion of definitions is often elevated and its presence regarded imperative. The practice of defining is canon to the structure of all academic endeavors; the idea of what can be defined drives epistemological enquiry in philosophy, the arts and natural sciences alike, while the characterization of the definition provokes investigations in the social sciences and stimulates innovation in engineering. Nevertheless, scholastic literature is often, somewhat ironically, riddled with vague and ambiguous terminology and the sheer process of its mental organization will leave even the brightest student disillusioned. The purpose of vagueness and ambiguity may, at a first glance, appear in juxtaposition to the very concept and intention of defining; namely that of articulating the phenomenon available to humankind. On the contrary, such linguistic devices serve to illustrate the depths of the word and even delimitate its bounds. A brief discussion on some linguistic properties of *anthropology* will demonstrate the proposed whimsical narrative of wisdom and strength in obscurity.

> ***Anthropology*** /ˌɛt.ɪˈmɒl.ə.dʒi/ noun. From Ancient Greek ἐτυμολογία (etumología), a composition of two words ***ánthrōpos*** (ἄνθρωπος, "human") and ***lógos*** (“speech”, “story” or “reasoning”). Anthropology is the holistic scientific and social study of human discourse.

The academic discipline of anthropology is an attempt at understanding the reciprocal dynamic of humanity and its social institutions. It is deliberately opaque with regards to its meaning and scope – the study of what appertain human rationale comprises all knowledge *per definitionem*. The intended consequences may best be appreciated by its morphology.



The use of the word ánthrōpos, rather than alternative designations such as *anthrōpótita*; humanity or humankind, accentuates its profundity. The choice objectifies humanity insofar as considering it the Other. It is not the phenomenology of living experience that is placed under scrutiny, but rather the structure and philosophy concerning human organization. Moreover, objectification appeals to the biological exterior, *ergo* asserting both importance and appositeness of entertaining scientific dictums. The use of logos implies an extension into the purpose or *utility* of the object and argues the necessity of context. Evaluating utility imposes questions of worth and value *per se*, as both are metrics of preference. Indeed, the idea and value of social institutions vary from society to society, between nationalities, ethnicities and generations and across individual preconditions and opinions. The sheer concept of knowledge as an image of *Ding an sich* has been approached with great skepticism by scholars and artists alike, in favor of inquiries into recurring patterns in the perception thereof. The systematic process of delineating and categorizing perception is referenced *cultural analysis* and arranged in the taxonomy of *cultures*. Any rigorous treatment of human nature necessitates mapping the emergence, extent and interrelation of observed practices. A dimension of historicity is therefore imposed.

*Summa summarum*, anthropology is the discipline concerned with mapping, organizing and conceptualizing the intention and structure of human *social order* in a rigorous and apprehensive manner. It is a scientific discipline to the extent that it advocates a research methodology on the basis of empiricism rather than speculation or introspection. Notably, it considers humankind a social being and falls under the social science field accordingly. Knowledge is holistically appreciated as a phenomenon inseparable from both the biological, environmental and cultural constraints that are naturally imposed by studying human behavior. It necessarily presents a comparative perspective, as the notion of utility or hierarchy of social practice is made sensible in relation and contrast to its alternatives and their employment.

This exercise provides a supporting argument for the suggested premise that ambiguous, arcane or archaic words may, upon closer inspection, prove to elucidate its essence, function and applicability. Even a quick deliberation on the etymology of a word may turn out to be a rewarding endeavor. The investigator is obliged to construct a conceptual image by deriving the morphemes and consequently pondering the implications of their amalgamation. The examination compels her into a process of contextualization to justify any conclusions; the very practice associated with deeper learning. The astute scholar would then seek out similar treatments to resolve erroneous inference and conceptions. Blessed by serendipity, she may even unravel unsubstantiated notions, methodological inadequacies or discriminatory judgments established *a priori*.


***ELI5*** Words that appear vague are more often than not a product of deliberate and careful synthesis. Probing their linguistic morphology serves the two-fold purpose of detailing the extent and limitations of the word in addition to highlighting any invalidity or imprecision in the line of reasoning.
